---
title: 'What did I learn at AIE?'
date: "2026-05-02"
---

I recently attended the [AIE conference in Europe](https://www.ai.engineer/europe). I find the AIE related content has a high signal to noise ratio and the main organizer, [@swyx](https://x.com/swyx), has his finger on the pulse. All the talks are posted on the youtube channel so you can get the content for free but I still find that there is no good substitute for attending in person. On youtube all talks look the same, in person you can see which room is fool and which one is empty. You can attend the satellite events around the conference, you can chat with other participants, you can hear the question someone asked which is often the most valuable thing from a talk. I also happen to like London. There are many reasons to be there in flesh, but probably the most important one is that attending affords you the time to take stock of where the field is. So now, with a few weeks in between me and conference, I will tell you my grand takeaway.  

**No one knows.**

The AI field is in a state of AI psychosis. Oscillating between excitement and anxiety at a frequency of 10 roundtrips a day. We are all so excited about all the new things we can build, all the limitations that were seemingly lifted overnight, but also how? Use that harness, this model not the other model, new IDEs, forks skills and hooks are flying everywhere. [It's everything, everywhere, all at once](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=wxN1T1uxQ2g). We are all beta testers for Anthropic and OpenAI. Who, by the way, also don't know. That's why they are pushing 10 new features every day, to see what sticks. The bike is being repaired while we are riding it, and we're all trying to make sense of it together. We all use Claude Code and Codex and have our own home-brewed workflow, but in reality, we don't know what works and why. Memory is no where near solved, the best interface so far is the terminal which is how people worked with computers before the internet ("the 90s called - they want their stuff back"), and the average user is still  struggling to leverage the immense potential of this technology. So with this in mind here are the three talks I liked and why: 

1) [Armin Ronacher & Cristina Poncela Cubeiro (Earendil): Designing agent legible codebases and embracing friction](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_zdroS0Hc74&t=4773s) 
   
   Armin & Christina take a pragmatic look at the field today and gives a name to something that everyone is feeling the "AI trap": there is pressure to ship faster so no time to review. They advise people to recognize the pattern and stop it. In a time when everyone wants to remove friction, Armin advises engineers to add it where it's needed. Paraphrasing the speakers: "friction is a good thing sometimes because is what allows to steer". Excellent talk, thought provoking and original. 

2) [Mario Zechner (Pi): Building the Pi agent and the dangers of AI generated technical debt](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_zdroS0Hc74&t=3665s) 
   This talk inspired me to experiment more which I think is the most important thing right now. No one knows what works and why, the only way out is through it. Open up the tools, try everything, see what works and try to understand why.  We live in an age where code is extremely flexible. Instead of spending time figuring out what is the latest feature of Claude Code and how to use it, invest your time in building your own tools. Pi enables this experimentation because it's an open source harness. It's like Claude Code but open source (unless of course we count Claude Code as open source after the recent accidental code leak) and it works with any model not just Anthropic models. Mario, the creator of pi, explains in his talk that his motivation to create pi was to take control of his interactions with the models. The problem that motivated him is only getting bigger with time. Claude code and Codex are constantly experimenting with their features (to a large degree in response to what each other is doing by the way) which is more annoying than exciting at this point. If you want to understand what goes in your context and what skill is being invoked and why, use pi or something like it. We live in an age where code is extremely flexible. Instead of spending time figuring out what is the latest feature of Claude Code and how to use it, invest your time in building your own tools. 

3) [Peter Steinberger (OpenAI): "State of the Claw": OpenClaw's explosive growth and AI generated security bounty overload](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=O_IMsEg91g8&t=5148s)
   While, my Claw journey predates the conference, it's fair I came back from it a changed man. I had a chance to hear and interact with the maintainers of the project and talk with other users. This talk is a representative of the OpenClaw vibe at the conference and satellite events, which felt like a  movement, not a product. OpenClaw is amazing because it is the first AI that feels like what everybody thinks AI is. It felt different than Claude or ChatGPT from the first moment I booted it up it. Peter managed to create something that is more than the sum of its parts, which is a lot harder to do than it seems. Interacting with OpenClaw feels like talking to a genuinely intelligent "being". The number one struggle of new users I see is opening a new chatgpt window and throwing at it random questions in rapid sequence, and the poor llm is trying desperately to chain them together finding connections where there aren't any. Something that seems so simple, yet still remains unresolved. OpenClaw is not perfect, but definitely represents a step forward. Will come back to this I am sure. 

## References
